+++
title = "BonsaiDb v0.4.0: Now available without async"

[extra]
author = "Jonathan Johnson"
author_url = "https://github.com/ecton"
+++

{{ whatis() }}

BonsaiDb [v0.4.0][release] has been released with a new blocking (non-async)
API, better identity/authentication session management, and many other
improvements. The full list of changes can be viewed [on the GitHub Release
page][release].

For readers who enjoy the "This month in BonsaiDb" updates, this release
announcement takes the place of that post this month.

## {{ anchor(text = "Updating existing projects") }}

This update contains no changes to how data is stored. However, there are a
large number of types that have been renamed to distinguish async types from
blocking types.

If you have an existing project and want to continue using async, here are the
types that you need to find and replace with their async counterparts in your
project:

| Crate | Blocking Type      | Async Type              |
|-------|--------------------|-------------------------|
| Core  | Connection         | AsyncConnection         |
| Core  | StorageConnection  | AsyncStorageConnection  |
| Core  | PubSub             | AsyncPubSub             |
| Core  | Subscriber         | AsyncSubscriber         |
| Core  | KeyValue           | AsyncKeyValue           |
| Core  | LowLevelConnection | AsyncLowLevelConnection |
| Local | Storage            | AsyncStorage            |
| Local | Database           | AsyncDatabase           |

After changing these types, you might encounter errors with functions like
`SerializedCollection::push_into` or `SerializedCollection::list`. In every
situation that this happens, you should be able to simply add `_async` to the
function name. For example, `SerializedCollection::push_into_async` is the async
version of `SerializedCollection::push_into`.

If you are using the local version of BonsaiDb, Tokio has become an optional
dependency. To enable async, enable the appropriate feature for whichever crate
you're importing:

```toml
bonsaidb = { version = "0.4.0", features = ["local", "local-async"] }
bonsaidb-local = { version = "0.4.0", default-features = false, features = ["async"] }
```

There are other small breaking changes which are unlikely to affect most users.
The full list can be [viewed in the CHANGELOG][changelog] or [release
page][release].

For those it might help, I've updated an [example project][minority-game] of
mine from v0.2 to this new release. The changes can be viewed in [this
commit][minority-game-update]. This project features a client/server workspace
and uses BonsaiDb's custom API functionality.

## {{ anchor(text = "Why introduce a blocking API?") }}

BonsaiDb has always wrapped [Nebari][nebari]'s blocking API with
[tokio::task::spawn_blocking][spawn-blocking] and exposed an async API. The
reason behind this initial design was that the local-only version of BonsaiDb
was a convenience feature, and the "real" benefit of projects adopting BonsaiDb
was to use its server mode (and eventually clustering mode). I believe strongly
that async is the best way to design a server that has long-lasting connections,
and the types of applications I envision being developed with BonsaiDb fit that
access model: Remote PubSub, Server-Push Apis, and more.

One day I was joking that a friend wouldn't want to use BonsaiDb for his project
because it would force him to use async. While he proceeded to say that async
wouldn't stop him, the exchange made me take stock of the current users of
BonsaiDb. Of all the people who I know are using BonsaiDb, most were only using
the local version and many weren't building networked applications.

Case in point, one user was painstakingly porting their
project to async from sync to be able to use BonsaiDb. Thankfully, this set of
changes were already underway, and they were able to be the first external
tester of the new blocking API.

## {{ anchor(text = "How does BonsaiDb enable both blocking and async access?") }}

For the the local implementation, the most direct implementation is the blocking
implementation. This means that there will be less overhead on local
"connections" using the non-async interface. The overhead of the async types is
very low, but it is
present, and it is the same overhead that has always been present on BonsaiDb's
interface.

The local implementation exposes `Storage` and `Database`, which implement
`StorageConnection` and `Connection` respectively. These types are the blocking
types. `AsyncStorage` and `AsyncDatabase` implement `AsyncStorageConnection` and
`AsyncConnection`. These types are the async types that internally store a
handle to the Tokio runtime they belong to. This grants these types the types
the ability to spawn blocking tasks as needed, even when used in async code that
is using another async runtime.

All local types offer several convenient functions that allow seamless
conversion to and from each other, enabling applications that use both blocking
and async to use BonsaiDb as their database with ease.

The server implementation currently only exposes an initialization API that is
compatible with async code. Once the server is initialized, however, a
`Server`/`CustomServer` instance can be converted to `Storage`, enabling
blocking access to the underlying storage layer.

The `Client` type used for accessing a server implements both
`StorageConnection` and `AsyncStorageConnection`, except for on WASM where no
blocking implementation is provided. Currently, all networking implementations
require Tokio to drive their networking behind the scenes, but in the future
alternative implementations are possible to remove the reliance on Tokio for the
network client.

## {{ anchor(text = "Improved authenticated session handling") }}

Prior to this release, there was no way to enforce database permissions in the
offline version of BonsaiDb. If you are building a multi-user app but are using
your own web server, how are you supposed to be able to leverage BonsaiDb's
permissions and authentication?

This release addresses this problem by moving all permission checking into the
offline version and adding `assume_identity()` to
`StorageConnection`/`AsyncStorageConnection`. Assuming an identity requires the
permission to be allowed by the current connection. These changes allow all
applications that need multi-user support to use the built-in role-based access
control and, optionally, the built-in password authentication.

Each connection object now has an associated [`Session`][session], available
through the new [`HasSession` trait][has-session]. The functions
`assume_identity()` and `authenticate()` return a new instance that is
authenticated with the updated identity and associated permissions. The original
connection retains its original authentication. This allows multiple
authentication sessions to coexist on the same underlying connection, regardless
of if it's a local or remote connection.

When opening a local storage/database/server, the connection begins with no
identity and restricted permissions. When connecting to a remote server, the
client's unauthenticated session is limited to the permissions from
[`ServerConfiguration::default_permissions`][default-permissions]. After
authenticating a user or assuming an identity,
[`StorageConfiguration::authenticated_permissions`][authenticated-permissions]
will be merged with the identity's granted permissions.

I hope to see users trying out BonsaiDb's built-in user management and
role-based access control!

## {{ anchor(text = "Primary Key/View Key improvements") }}

The [`Key` trait][key-guide] has been split into two traits: [`Key`][key-trait]
and [`KeyEncoding`][key-encoding-trait]. This split has enabled various queries to
take borrowed representations of the keys. For example, a `String` key type can
now be queried using an `&str`:

```rust
let doc = MyCollection::get("my key", &db)?;
let mappings = db.view::<MyView>().with_key("my key").query()?;
```

Additional types now have `Key` implementations provided for them: `[u8; N]`,
`SystemTime` and `Duration`.

## {{ anchor(text = "Using Time as a Key") }}

Both `SystemTime` and `Duration` are stored with the full range that `Duration`
supports. In memory, these types require 12 bytes to represent, and even with
variable integer encoding, the values encoded as keys can still be fairly long.

Most users don't need nanosecond precision with the range of 42 times the age of
the universe. After a fun coworking session [on our Discord server][discord], I
introduced [`LimitedResolutionDuration`][lrd] and
[`LimitedResolutionTimestamp][lrt]. These types allow representing durations and
timestamps using smaller in-memory representations, and offer additional
compression using variable integer encoding and customizable epochs.

To see an example of the benefits, compare timestamps encoded over the span of
the next 40 years and their `Key`-encoded lengths:

{{ blockimage(alt="Timestamp Encoding Lengths (bytes)", src="/images/timestamp-key-encoding-chart.png" )}}

As you can see, `SystemTime` encodes as 9 bytes (and will continue to do so
until year 10,680). This is true of Duration as well, because `SystemTime`'s
`Key` implementation encodes the duration from the unix epoch.

By using one millisecond resolution, we can reduce the number of bytes down to 6 and
also use only 8 bytes in memory to represent the value. By using one second
resolution, we can further reduce the key size by another byte.

How can we compress timestamps further? By leveraging an Epoch that is closer to
the median of the expected timestamp/duration range, we can allow the variable
integer encoding to shine. The closer to the Epoch the timestamp is, the smaller
the value is.

In the above chart, the two values that dip in the middle use
[`BonsaiEpoch`][bonsai-epoch]. After considering that databases either live long
enough to be used for almost an eternity (PostgreSQL was first released in the
1980s) or live a short life. I thought the 10-year anniversary of the first
commit of BonsaiDb seemed like a good idea.

Despite it being an arbitrary decision, further consideration showed that epoch
is good for one reason: Nanosecond-resolution timestamps encoded today will
encode as 8 bytes, and will continue doing so until year 2,049. If an epoch
slightly farther out were chosen, today's timestamps would encode with a full 9
bytes, offering no benefit over the unix epoch version. This extra byte of
savings isn't much, but it does make the key size word size or less on most
modern machines.

I've added a [full set of types][time-types] that support resolutions ranging
from nanoseconds to weeks, and timestamp types that support both the BonsaiDb
and unix epochs. You can also implement your [own resolution][time-resolution]
and/or [epoch][time-epoch] to tailor fit how these new types work.

## {{ anchor(text = "Other contributors this release") }}

I wanted to make sure to include a mention for [@vbmade2000][vbmade2000]'s
contributions to this release. They added the [ability to delete users][215],
and the [ability to retrieve][221] a list of document headers without fetching
the document's contents.

If you are interested in contributing to BonsaiDb, I am trying to keep a healthy
list of [good first issues][good-first-issues].

## {{ anchor(text = "Getting Started") }}

{{ gettingstarted() }}

[bonsaidb]: https://github.com/khonsulabs/bonsaidb
[release]: https://github.com/khonsulabs/bonsaidb/releases/tag/v0.4.0
[changelog]: https://github.com/khonsulabs/bonsaidb/blob/v0.4.0/CHANGELOG.md
[vbmade2000]: https://github.com/vbmade2000
[nebari]: https://github.com/khonsulabs/nebari
[spawn-blocking]: https://docs.rs/tokio/latest/tokio/task/fn.spawn_blocking.html
[minority-game]: https://minority-game.gooey.rs/
[minority-game-update]: https://github.com/khonsulabs/minority-game/commit/c7ae081a0c37dc359f4c6e0bc2f821dc5a73f8aa
[has-session]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/core/connection/trait.HasSession.html
[session]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/core/connection/struct.Session.html
[default-permissions]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/server/struct.ServerConfiguration.html#structfield.default_permissions
[authenticated-permissions]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/local/config/struct.StorageConfiguration.html#structfield.authenticated_permissions
[key-guide]: https://dev.bonsaidb.io/release/guide/traits/key.html
[key-trait]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/core/key/trait.Key.html
[key-encoding-trait]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/core/key/trait.KeyEncoding.html
[discord]: https://discord.khonsulabs.com/
[lrd]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/core/key/time/limited/struct.LimitedResolutionDuration.html
[lrt]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/core/key/time/limited/struct.LimitedResolutionTimestamp.html
[bonsai-epoch]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/core/key/time/limited/struct.BonsaiEpoch.html
[time-types]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/core/key/time/index.html#types
[time-resolution]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/core/key/time/limited/trait.TimeResolution.html
[time-epoch]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/core/key/time/limited/trait.TimeEpoch.html
[good-first-issues]: https://github.com/khonsulabs/bonsaidb/issues?q=is%3Aopen+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc
[221]: https://github.com/khonsulabs/bonsaidb/pull/221
[215]: https://github.com/khonsulabs/bonsaidb/pull/215
