+++
title = "BonsaiDb v0.3.0: Optimized views, bug fixes, and more"

[extra]
author = "Jonathan Johnson"
author_url = "https://github.com/ecton"
+++

{{ whatis() }}

BonsaiDb [v0.3.0][release] has been released featuring optimized view
processing, bug fixes, and a few new features -- including one from a new
contributor!

Optimization of the view processing system has been covered in the [previous
blog post](/blog/february-2022-update#Optimizing%20View%20Mapping).

## {{ anchor(text = "Deleting users via StorageConnection") }}

A new function, `delete_user()` has been added to `StorageConnection`, allowing
for users to not only be created but also deleted without direct database
access. This feature was added by [@vbmade2000][vbmade2000] -- now the third
contributor to the BonsaiDb repository!

BonsaiDb provides open-access its [admin schema types][admin-types]. This meant
that users could still be deleted, but it required doing so directly through
`Storage::admin()`, and couldn't be done over a networked client, for example.

## {{ anchor(text = "Querying Data by Prefix") }}

A user on Discord requested an easier way to be able to query data using a
prefix. For example, if the key type is a `String` or `Vec<u8>`, a query should
be able to be made for any matches that start with a given prefix. Collections
now support listing documents with a given prefix:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Serialize, Deserialize, Default, Collection)]
#[collection(name = "MyCollection", primary_key = String)]
pub struct MyCollection;

let results = MyCollection::list_with_prefix(String::from("a"), db).await?;
```

`results` will contain all documents whose id's start with `a`. The same
capability is also available for views:

```rust
#[derive(View, Debug, Clone)]
#[view(name = "by-name", key = String, collection = MyCollection)]
struct ByName;

for mapping in db
    .view::<ByName>()
    .with_key_prefix(String::from("a"))
    .query()
    .await?
{
    assert!(mapping.key.starts_with("a"));
    println!("{} in document {:?}", mapping.key, mapping.source);
}
```

This functionality is powered by a new trait,
[`IntoPrefixRange`](https://dev.bonsaidb.io/release/docs/bonsaidb/core/key/trait.IntoPrefixRange.html),
which allows any custom key type to provide this functionality if possible.
BonsaiDb currently only provides implementations for `String` and the `Vec<u8>`
types.

## {{ anchor(text = "Nebari Bug Fixes") }}

This release updates [Nebari][nebari] to [v0.4.0][nebari-release]. It contains
an important fix to ensure the transaction log is always written sequentially.
This edge case was discovered while running unit tests "one more time" before
preparing a release. A unit test that never failed suddenly failed. Here's the
code in question that failed:

```rust
let mut handles = Vec::new();
for _ in 0..10 {
    let manager = manager.clone();
    handles.push(std::thread::spawn(move || {
        for id in 0_u32..1_000 {
            let tx = manager.new_transaction([&id.to_be_bytes()[..]]);
            tx.commit().unwrap();
        }
    }));
}
```

The test then proceeds to wait for all the threads to finish and verify the
results. One thing it does is attempt to load each transaction one by one. At
first glance, this seems innocuous, but due to how Nebari is designed,
`new_transaction()` allocates a transaction id, but it isn't written to the
transaction log until `commit()` occurs. I was *lucky* to have this test fail,
as it was a legitimate edge case that I hadn't tested against. Needless to say,
there's now a dedicated unit test to out-of-order writing.

While working on this fix, however, I now have enough of a reason to implement
the next version of the transaction log to address a few design issues I've
thought of since writing it originally. The good news is that even if the
transaction log your database has currently is out of order, I plan to have the
upgrade process to the new format fix any ordering issues.

## {{ anchor(text = "Getting Started") }}

{{ gettingstarted() }}

[bonsaidb]: https://github.com/khonsulabs/bonsaidb
[release]: https://github.com/khonsulabs/bonsaidb/releases/tag/v0.3.0
[nebari-release]: https://github.com/khonsulabs/nebari/releases/tag/v0.4.0
[vbmade2000]: https://github.com/vbmade2000
[admin-types]: https://docs.rs/bonsaidb/latest/bonsaidb/core/admin/index.html
[nebari]: https://github.com/khonsulabs/nebari
